In this lecture, you'll learn about Dynamic NAT. Dynamic NAT uses a pool of what are usually public
IP addresses which are given out on an as needed, first come, first served basis. Dynamic NAT is usually
used for internal hosts which need to connect out to the Internet, but they do not accept incoming connections.
So looking at our lab again, in the last lecture, we configured a Static NAT rule to give INT-S1,
our internal server, up in the top left, a fixed permanent public IP address so it could be reached
by host sending incoming connections in from the Internet.
In this one, we're going to be doing NAT for our normal desktop PCs that you see down in the bottom
left.
So they are on the 10.0.2.0 network. They're just standard desktop PCs
so they never need to accept incoming connections coming in from the Internet. Whenever they're communicating
with the Internet,
the traffic is always initiated by them in the outbound direction. They need to except return traffic coming back
in from the outside,
but traffic is never initiated from the outside. So they don't need to have a permanent fix public
IP address.
They can just get the next available public IP address as in when they need it.
So in our scenario, we've bought the range of public IP addresses, 203.0.113.0/28
from the service provider.
It's the same scenario again that we used for Static NAT. 203.0.113.2
is on the outside interface on R1. 203.0.113.1
is being used by the service provider on the other side of that link.
And we're already using 203.0.113.3 for the Static NAT rule that we
configured in the last lecture.
So that leaves us with 203.0.113.4 to
203.0.113.14.
The hosts in the 10.0.2.0/24 network do not need to accept incoming connections, like I just
explained. But they do need to have the outbound connectivity to the Internet
so they do need to have a public IP address when they do that.
So we're going to use those remaining addresses, 203.0.113.4 - 14 for this.
And we're going to put them into a pool that are going to be allocated first come first served whenever
a host on the inside, sends traffic out to the outside.
The first host to send traffic out will be translated to the first address in the pool.
That's 203.0.113.4.
The second host will get the next address, 203.0.113.5, etc., all the
way up to 203.0.113.14 at the end of the pool.
Now, with Standard Dynamic NAT that we're discussing in this lecture, you need a public IP address
for every inside host that needs to communicate with the outside.
So, for example, if you had 30 hosts inside, you would need 30 public IP addresses. If you had 200
hosts, you would need 200 public IP addresses. When all the addresses in the pool have been used with just
Standard Dynamic NAT, new outbound connections from other inside hosts will fail because there's no public
IP addresses left to translate them to.
So in that case, a host that tried to send a traffic out when there was no addresses available, they're
all used up,
it would have to wait for an existing connection to be torn down and the translation to be released
back into the pool before it was able to send traffic out.
So it's Standard Dynamic NAT that we're discussing here, is not typically used in the real world.
What is used is PAT, Port Address Translation, and I'll cover that next.
But you need to understand Standard Dynamic NAT first.
So that's what we're doing here.
So our configuration, we need to specify our interfaces again. So we've got IP, we've got
interface fa0/0, we see IP NAT outside. We'd actually already done that in the previous lab for Static
NAT so we don't need to do it again.
The config was already there. But our inside hosts are on a different interface than our inside server
was.
Remember that inside server was on fa1/0.
Our desktop hosts are on fa2/0 so we need to say interface fa2/0, ip nat inside.
So for our scenario,
we're actually going to end up having 2 IP NAT inside interfaces, interface fa1/0 that
faces the server with the Static NAT entry and interface fa2/0 that is facing our desktop
PCs.
They're going to be used for the Dynamic NAT entry.
That's fine.
On all of your interfaces,
you can specify outside or inside on there and you can have different interfaces as outside and as inside.
So we configure our interfaces.
Next up, we need to configure the pool of global addresses that will be available for our hosts. So for that,
the command at global config is ip nat pool.
Give it a name, Flackbox.
And then the range of addresses. It is going from 203.0.113.4 to
203.0.113.14. And then netmask or the subnet mask.
Well the subnet mask on our outside interface is 255.255.255.248.
So that's what we use here.
Next, we create an access list which references the internal IP addresses that we want to translate.
Here,
we need to identify the hosts on the inside and it's going to be by the source address so we can just
use standard ACL here.
If you want to get more granular than this, you can also use an extended access control list with source
and destination addresses.
That's a valid configuration as well.
But for our configuration here, we'll keep things simple.
We can just do a standard ACL. So our command is access-list 1 permit 10.0.2.0 and the wildcard
is 0.0.0.255.
So we've specified the pool of addresses. We've specified the hosts that are going to get translated into
those addresses.
The last thing we need to do is tie them together. So the command to do that
is ip nat inside source.
It's a list this time and list 1 means use access list 1. And then the pool, we're going to translate them
to is pool Flackbox.
So that's it.
That's the complete config to do Dynamic
NAT when we're not using PAT yet.
If we want to verify it, it's the same command as before, show ip nat translation. In the example output
here, you can see that we've got an entry for Inside
Local, our inside desktop PC, is 10.0.2.10,
and it's been translated into 203.0.113.4, which was the first available
address in the pool.
And it's sending traffic out to 203.0.113.20. If another
host then sends traffic, it would be translated to 203.0.113.5.
And we would see an entry for that in the translation table as well.
Remember, you need to be quick with this command because entries time out quite quickly.
This is a good time to tell you about another couple of show commands for NAT as well, and the clear
command here. So clear ip nat translation can be used to remove translations from the translation
table. And that can be useful when troubleshooting.
So if you're seeing output that you weren't expecting, you can clear the translations in there and then send
the traffic back out again just to double check what's actually happening.
It's also often required, if you want to edit, your NAT configuration will not allow changes when
there are active translations.
So if you want to edit it, make sure that all the translations are cleared first or you're going to get
an error message
if you try to change a configuration. To remove all dynamic translations, it's clear ip nat translation
and then a star.
So you can you can remove just a single specific translation if you want, or you can remove all by
using that asterisk wildcard.
The other command that I wanted to show you, was show ip nat statistics.
So this command,
we don't use it as often as show ip nat translation, but this tells us how many addresses have actually
been translated.
OK, so that was Dynamic
NAT. In the next lecture,
I'll show you how to configure it with a lab demo.